# Example data - statistics extracted from patch annotations

This directory contains JSON files generated with `diff-gather-stats`
script and its various subcommand, processing the output of running
`diff-annotate from-repo` command.  Those files were generated by
running the [DVC][] [pipeline][[dvc-pipelines]] (defined in
the [`/dvc.yaml`](../../../dvc.yaml) file) with the `dvc repro` command.

Using DVC pipeline makes it possible to regenerate only those files
that need it, and re-run all stages that need it.

Those files are being analyzed by Jupyter notebooks in the
[`/notebooks/`](../../../notebooks) directory.


## Projects and repositories

The list of different example repositories taken into considerations
is borrowed from the [GitVision app demo site](https://gitvis.web.app/).

- Large repositories:
  - [TensorFlow](https://github.com/tensorflow/tensorflow): A comprehensive machine learning library by Google<br>
    This repo provides a great example of a large, complex open-source project with a very active community.
  - ...

Repositories are cloned into `~/example_repositories/`
which links to `/mnt/data/python-diff-annotator/example_repositories/`
on `przybysz` (access via SSH using VPN).

This can be done by running the "clone" stage of the DVC pipeline.

**NOTE:** all commands are assumed to be run from the _top directory_
of the project, not from its `examples/stats/` subdirectory.


## Generating annotation data

The annotation data for further processing is generated directly from the repo
in the "flat" format.  It was generated with the following command:
```commandline
diff-annotate from-repo \
  --output-dir=data/example/annotations/tensorflow/ezhulenev/ \
  ~/example_repositories/tensorflow/ \
  --author=ezhulenev@google.com
```
and
```commandline
diff-annotate from-repo \
  --output-dir=data/example/annotations/tensorflow/yong.tang/ \
  ~/example_repositories/tensorflow/ \
  --author=yong.tang.github@outlook.com
```
both using the "annotate" stage of DVC pipeline.

The "flat" format has the following structure:
`<output_dir>/<commit_id>.json`.

## Generating stats data

Statistics computed from annotations were saved in JSON files, one single
file per different type of statistics.

- `tensorflow.purpose-per-file.json` (1.8 MB) was generated with the following command<br>
  using the "purpose-per-file" stage of DVC pipeline:

    ```commandline
    diff-gather-stats --annotations-dir='' \
      purpose-per-file \
      data/examples/stats/tensorflow.purpose-per-file.json \
      data/examples/annotations/tensorflow/
    ```


- `tensorflow.lines-stats.json` (9.8 MB) was generated with the following command<br>
  using the "lines-stats" stage of DVC pipeline:

    ```commandline
    diff-gather-stats --annotations-dir='' \
      lines-stats \
      data/examples/stats/tensorflow.lines-stats.json \
      data/examples/annotations/tensorflow/
    ```


- `tensorflow.timeline.json` (3.2 MB) was generated with the following command<br>
  using the "timeline" stage of DVC pipeline:

    ```commandline
    diff-gather-stats --annotations-dir='' \
      timeline \
      data/examples/stats/tensorflow.timeline.json \
      data/examples/annotations/tensorflow/
    ```


- `tensorflow.timeline.purpose-to-type.json` (3.2 MB) was generated with
  the following command<br>
  using the "timeline.purpose-to-type" stage of DVC pipeline:

    ```commandline
    diff-gather-stats --annotations-dir='' \
      timeline \
      --purpose-to-annotation=data \
      --purpose-to-annotation=documentation \
      --purpose-to-annotation=markup \
      --purpose-to-annotation=other \
      --purpose-to-annotation=project \
      --purpose-to-annotation=test \
      data/examples/stats/tensorflow.timeline.purpose-to-type.json \
      data/examples/annotations/tensorflow/
    ```


[DVC]: https://dvc.org/ "Data Version Control · DVC"
[dvc-pipelines]: https://dvc.org/doc/user-guide/pipelines "Pipelines | Data Version Control · DVC"
